# A Very Simple and Fast Reinforcement Learning Agent for the 2048 Game
Q-learning (kind of) with linear operator applied to some simple designed one-hot feutures as a value function, and the usual game score as a reward.
After three days of training on 1 CPU core of an old Mac-book pro the Agent reaches 2048 in 84% of games, 4096 in 47%, 8192 - sometimes. First time i saw 2048 tile was after just 2 minutes of training and 200 epsiodes. Plays a game to 2048 in about 1 second. This is my first project in Machine Learning and it feels like magic to me! :)

### Requirements
Almost none. Apart from python3 yopu need to install numpy and pygame libraries, and the latter is needed for show.py, you can run the main learning program without it.

## 2048 Game
2048 is a single-player sliding block puzzle game designed by Italian web developer Gabriele Cirulli. The game's objective is to slide numbered tiles on a grid to combine them to create a tile with the number 2048. Of course, one can keep playing and achieve bigger tiles, with theoretical but probably unachiavable limit
of 131072 (2 to the power of 17). When I used to play the game as a time-killer and stress-releiver some years ago, the best i've sometimes achieved was 8192 tile and my best score around 150,000.

For those who never played it but are nevertheless interested, here is a brief description:
2048 is played on a 4×4 grid, with tiles numbered by powers of 2: 2, 4, 8 etc. The board starts with two random 2 or 4 tiles. At each step the Player can try to shake the board in one of the four directions: left, up, right or down. Tiles slide as far as possible in the chosen direction until they are stopped by either another tile or the edge of the grid. If two tiles with the same number collide while moving, they merge into a tile with twice the value. This new number is added to the score. The resulting tile cannot merge with another tile again in the same move. If nothing on the board changed as a result of the Player's action, i.e. the move did not happen, the Player has to choose another move. If there are no valid moves - the game is over. Now, every turn after the Player's move, a new tile randomly appears in an empty spot on the board with a value of either 2 or 4, with 0.9 and 0.1 probabilities respectively.

You can play the game by choosing option 0 while running:

`python3 show.py`

## Reinforcement Learning with Approximating State Value Function
I won't describe RL in detail, as one can easily google it. Briefly: we'd like to program an Agent, supply it with the rules of the game and devise a learning strategy in such a way that it will gradually learn to play better and better from scratch without any further human input. Ideally, the Agent could learn what to do exactly in any given poisition of the board, i.e. learn the table that supplies the best action give the state of the game. Or, alternatively, some numeric valuation of the state, and then the action at each step is taken in the direction of the best valuation of the resulting state. (The latter approach is used in this work.) But in 2048 game the number of possible states is astronomical, hence the tabular approach is impossible and the Agent's valuation function has to be a true function, not a table.

## What i tried to do, how it didn't work, and my version of why it didn't.
The Agent starts with the random moves, so the first milestone is to beat the random strategy. It is not easy!
The first thing that comes to the mind of somebody like me, who started to study Machine Learning recently, is to try Neural Networks. Atari games, Alpha-chess and Alpha-zero - the recent successes of Deep RL are plenty. Tensorflow and other frameworks make writing such an Agent pretty easy and Google Colab provides an opportunity to train it with GPU/TPU for free. And indeed a lot of people tried it before, google "2048 reinforcement learning github". Some even claim success ... althogh I tried and was not able to replicate any of those. Some admit that they were not able to beat random walk, which fits my experience.
I spent two weeks trying to achieve this with NNs of different architectures. Convolutions of different sizes, branching layers and adding them back for a final 1-2 dense layers etc. Nothing worked. I even tried to add some man-made features to supply my Agent with human heuristics, like have max tiles in the corners etc. (This is somewhat against the spirit of RL, but I was desperate). It could be because the training process with even a relatively small NN is very slow, and you need to play a lot of episoded to achieve anything in this particular game. Why is that? Consider Chess or Go. The games are way more complex than 2048, but how many random moves can one make before losing the game to even an amateur human player? Just 3 in Chess - google "checkmate in 3 moves". I don't play Go but as far as I understand one has to secure corners right at the start of the game, so random moves will get you killed very fast as well. Now, how many random moves can one make in 2048 without losing the opportunity to still get back on track to beat the records, if one plays carefully? 100 random steps are survivable in 60% of cases, 50 steps - in 99%. You can play with `random_eval` estimator `in game_logic.py` to check that. This means that for an Agent to learn that some initial moves are statistically better than others, it has to play a lot of starts.

## What finally worked, and I don't really understand why it works so well.
Firstly, one can notice that the numbers on the tiles are a distraction, they could as well be colors or some other tags. Tiles of the same color produce another color and an increase in score when joined. So, in effect, the values of tiles are categorical features and have to be treated as such, for Neural Networks or any other approach. Now, imagine we could make a huge table and assign to each combination of colors a valuation of the position. After a long time of training the Agent will encounter most positons many times, get the valuations right and thus learn to play an ideal game. Of course, we can't have such a table, plus it will be an extremely slow process. But what if we take some smaller pieces of the board, list all possible states there? We take pairs of adjacent tiles, there are 24 such pairs on the board and, assuming the highest tile we hope to see is 2 ** 15 = 32768, only 16 * 16 = 256 possibilities for those pairs to be. We can then one-hot them, i.e. make 24 * 256 = 6144 feutures that for any given state of the board are all 0 except 24 which are eqial to 1. Now we can try to feed those as an input layer of a Neural Network ...
At this point i remember an obervation made by a practicing data scientist in Medium article I've read recently: if you want to understand if your features are any good at all, run a simople linear regressiion on them. If the result is the same as random noise - probably don't waste your time on more complictated algorithms. So i run a linear regression, which is just a sum of weights of non-zero features in this casse - and bingo! - the scores skyrocket and in the first 1000 episodes we already have 50% games with 1024 best tile and 7% with 2048. Run to see yourself, it takes just a couple of minutes.
```
from game2048.r_learning import Q_agent
agent = Q_agent(n=2)
episodes = 1000
Q_agent.train_run(episodes, agent=agent, saving=False)
```

